---
{"title":"How AI-generated Contents May Affect Marketing?","aliases":["How AI-generated Contents May Affect Marketing?"],"location":"Badda, Dhaka","tags":["AI","Marketing"],"dg-note-icon":2,"dg-publish":true,"created":"2023-03-24T11:03:46+06:00","updated":"2024-09-24T09:21:45+06:00","dg-path":"Musings/AI gen Content and Marketing.md","permalink":"/musings/ai-gen-content-and-marketing/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"noteIcon":2}
---

Marketing companies found a novel way to produce content with fewer resources, yet of better quality, using the new AI tools. This is an apt way to do things because instead of working with art, literature, and research, agencies work with design and copywriting. These last two are all about getting more traction.

## Adaptation
This process has already been started. It is only a matter of time (and very short) that every agency will be using these tools. A new class of workers— *prompters or prompt-engineers,* will be in high demand.

## Saturation
At a point in future, AI-generated content will be the norm. Hardly we will find content not generated by an AI, at least partially.

## Reaction
Depending on the quality of the consumers, multiple possible reactions can be deduced.

### Unaware
The unaware consumer will only know a little about the AI tools. They will be convinced by the message, regardless of how authentic the things they are representing.

### Aware
Awareness is inevitable. In fact, for most urban consumers, it will come as fast as the AI-generated content land. Aware customers will notice the discrepancies faster. For example, they will find the actual foods look nothing like the ones advertised, colours are distorted in the case of dresses, etc. They will soon learn to offset this by considering an error margin. With the abundance of pretty content, they will soon find them less engaging. In most of the communication, they will fall back to 'meh'.

#### Search for Real Information
Soon, the aware people will try to get authentic information through alternate channels. Influencers will get another rush of good luck. However, AI-generated sponsored content shared by influencers might bring a bad reputation to them.